Added myst version of x-ray tutorial. (#49)
numpy/numpy-tutorials: content/tutorial-x-ray-image-processing.md

---
jupytext:
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.12
    jupytext_version: 1.7.1
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3
  language: python
  name: python3
---

# Tutorial: X-ray image processing

+++

> This tutorial demonstrates how to read and process X-ray images with NumPy,
> imageio, Matplotlib and SciPy. You will learn how to load medical images, focus
> on certain parts, and visually compare them using mask filters and the
> [Sobel](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sobel_operator) and
> [Canny](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Canny_edge_detector) edge detectors. X-ray
> image analysis can be part of your data analysis and

Reviewer: @melissawm Thanks so much for driving this 👍 

Just realized something - we should mention the newly added Gaussian and Laplacian-Gaussian methods in the intro (I can open a small PR for the notebook later). Also, to improve readability for busy users, we can split the 1st paragraph into 2 shorter ones.

Suggestion:

```suggestion
This tutorial demonstrates how to read and process X-ray images with NumPy,
imageio, Matplotlib and SciPy. You will learn how to load medical images, focus
on certain parts, and visually compare them using the
[Gaussian](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gaussian_filter),
[Laplacian-Gaussian](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Laplace_distribution),
[Sobel](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sobel_operator), and
[Canny](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Canny_edge_detector) filters for edge
detection. 

X-ray image analysis can be part of your data analysis and
```

    ```

    ```python
    %timeit C = [combined_xray_images_2.append(imageio.imread(os.path.join(DIR, '00000011_00'+str(i)+'.png'))) for i in range(8)]
    ```

    Example output:

    ```
    159 ms ± 2.69 ms per loop (mean ± std. dev. of 7 runs, 10 loops each)
    ```

+++

**2.** Check the shape of the new X-ray image array containing 8 stacked images:

```{code-cell} ipython3
combined_xray_images_1.shape
```

**3.** You can now display the "health progress" by plotting each of frames next
to each other using Matplotlib:

```{code-cell} ipython3
fig, axes = plt.subplots(nrows=1, ncols=8, figsize=(30, 30))

for i in range(8):
    x = combined_xray_images_1[i]
    axes[i].imshow(x, cmap='gray')
    axes[i].axis('off')
```

**4.** In addition, it can be helpful to show the progress as an animation.
Let's create a GIF file with `imageio.mimwrite()` and display the result in the
notebook:

```{code-cell} ipython3
from IPython.display import Image

GIF_PATH = os.path.join(DIR, 'xray_image.gif')
imageio.mimwrite(GIF_PATH, combined_xray_images_1, format= '.gif', fps = 1) 

Image(filename=GIF_PATH, width=400, height=400)
```

> 

Reviewer: Thanks for the workaround, good idea

> 

Author: Thanks, @rossbar ! This looks sufficient (and I don't think gifs will be all that common)

["edges"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edge_detection) to focus on particular
features in an image. To do that, using
[image gradients](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Image_gradient) can be
particularly helpful when detecting the change of color pixel intensity.

+++

### The Laplace filter with Gaussian second derivatives

Let's start with an n-dimensional
[Laplace](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Laplace_distribution) filter
("Laplacian-Gaussian") that uses
[Gaussian](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Normal_distribution) second
derivatives. This Laplacian method focuses on pixels with rapid intensity change
in values and is combined with Gaussian smoothing to
[remove noise](https://homepages.inf.ed.ac.uk/rbf/HIPR2/log.htm). Let's examine
how it can be useful in analyzing 2D X-ray images.

+++

- The implementation of the Laplacian-Gaussian filter is relatively
straightforward: 1) import the `ndimage` module from SciPy; and 2) call
[`scipy.ndimage.gaussian_laplace()`](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.ndimage.gaussian_laplace.html)
with a sigma (scalar) parameter, which affects the standard deviations of the

> Gaussian filter (you'll use `1` in the example below):

Reviewer 2: Also note that the leading `- ` [turns this paragraph into a bullet](https://59-248354526-gh.circle-artifacts.com/0/site/_build/html/content/tutorial-x-ray-image-processing.html#the-laplace-filter-with-gaussian-second-derivatives) - not sure if that's intentional or not!

> Gaussian filter (you'll use `1` in the example below):

Reviewer: The dash is intentional. 

The steps were numbered to help users follow the train of thought, since the sentence wasn't a simple one. It does look better now after the suggestion 👍 

Thanks !

```

### The Sobel-Feldman operator (the Sobel filter)

To find regions of high spatial frequency (the edges or the edge maps) along the
horizontal and vertical axes of a 2D X-ray image, you can use the
[Sobel-Feldman operator (Sobel filter)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sobel_operator)
technique. The Sobel filter applies two 3x3 kernel matrices — one for each axis
— onto the X-ray through a [convolution](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kernel_(image_processing)#Convolution).
Then, these two points (gradients) are combined using the
[Pythagorean theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pythagorean_theorem) to
produce a gradient magnitude.

+++

**1.** Use the Sobel filters — ([`scipy.ndimage.sobel()`](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.ndimage.sobel.html))
— on x- and y-axes of the X-ray. Then, calculate the distance between `x` and
`y` (with the Sobel filters applied to them) using the
[Pythagorean theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pythagorean_theorem) and
NumPy's [`np.hypot()`](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/generated/numpy.hypot.html)
to obtain the magnitude. Finally, normalize the rescaled image for the pixel
values to be between 0 and 255. 

>     [Image normalization](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Normalization_%28image_processing%29)
>     follows the `output_channel = 255.0 * (input_channel - min_value) / (max_value - min_value)`
>     [formula](http://dev.ipol.im/~nmonzon/Normalization.pdf). Because you're
>     using a grayscale image, you need to normalize just one channel.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Image normalization](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Normalization_%28image_processing%29)
follows the `output_channel = 255.0 * (input_channel - min_value) / (max_value - min_value)`
[formula](http://dev.ipol.im/~nmonzon/Normalization.pdf). Because you're
using a grayscale image, you need to normalize just one channel.
```
The indentation here causes this to be interpreted [as a literal block](https://59-248354526-gh.circle-artifacts.com/0/site/_build/html/content/tutorial-x-ray-image-processing.html#the-sobel-feldman-operator-the-sobel-filter).

Note that MyST supports admonitions just like rST:
````suggestion
```{note}
[Image normalization](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Normalization_%28image_processing%29)
follows the `output_channel = 255.0 * (input_channel - min_value) / (max_value - min_value)`
[formula](http://dev.ipol.im/~nmonzon/Normalization.pdf). Because you're
using a grayscale image, you need to normalize just one channel.
```
````
unfortunately since this is a MyST-specific feature, they don't render properly in `.ipynb` files, only the html.

Reviewer: Good point
